[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: What is Democracy?
[Amit Varma]: Democracy doesn't just mean voting one political party to power for five years and then sitting
[Amit Varma]: back and hoping it all works out.
[Amit Varma]: Democracy only functions well when there are safeguards that keep a check on the people
[Amit Varma]: in power and mechanisms that keep governments transparent and accountable.
[Amit Varma]: In India, though, democracy has become just a once-in-five-years samasha.
[Amit Varma]: Democracy is an opaque, parasitic beast that sucks citizens dry while delivering no services
[Amit Varma]: to them.
[Amit Varma]: And the elections that happen every five years are a contest between competing mafias, all
[Amit Varma]: of them trying to bribe their way to power one way or another so they can rake it in
[Amit Varma]: while we suffer silently.
[Amit Varma]: What is a citizen to do?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhatma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I tend to be a pessimist when it comes to government.
[Amit Varma]: Governments never grow smaller.
[Amit Varma]: It is in the nature of the beast to grow and grow like a parasite sucking the blood of
[Amit Varma]: the common citizen.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, we can't just sit there and let it happen.
[Amit Varma]: We need to fight back for our own sakes.
[Amit Varma]: And my guest today is a man who has spent two decades doing just that.
[Amit Varma]: V. Ravi Chander, a businessman based in Bangalore, describes himself as a civic evangelist and
[Amit Varma]: a patron saint of lost causes.
[Amit Varma]: While those around him have merely outraged, he has actually dived into the cesspool that
[Amit Varma]: is local government and worked hard on bringing about reform.
[Amit Varma]: I caught up with him at the sidelines of the Bangalore Literature Festival a few weeks
[Amit Varma]: ago, and I found his insights to be incredibly thought-provoking.
[Amit Varma]: Without any further ado, here it is.
[Amit Varma]: Ravi, welcome to the show.
[Guest]: Thanks Amit for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Ravi, I'm really glad to have you here.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you've been working in the field of urban governance for the last 17 years.
[Amit Varma]: You're described by people as a civic evangelist.
[Amit Varma]: And you've described yourself as a patron saint of lost causes.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to delve a little further into this.
[Amit Varma]: Why?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, even though you're being ironic, why did urban governance seem like such a lost
[Amit Varma]: cause to you?
[Amit Varma]: And clearly you don't really feel that way because you've been at it for 17 years.
[Guest]: That's true.
[Guest]: Actually, it all started in 2000, when we had the Bangalore Agenda Task Force.
[Guest]: And Nandan asked whether I would serve on that.
[Guest]: And I had no idea what urban governance was about.
[Guest]: That's Nandan Nalekani, who's been an old friend of yours.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: So I had no idea.
[Guest]: And I said, okay.
[Guest]: And trust me, within the first month of working in the space with civic authorities and the
[Guest]: like, I just got hooked.
[Guest]: I realized that this was an area that could do with a lot of reform.
[Guest]: That was the obvious thing when you go with a private sector consulting mind.
[Guest]: But as you worked within the system, you realize how dysfunctional it was, how difficult it
[Guest]: was to get outcomes that people want in the city space.
[Guest]: And when you work in an environment like that, you suddenly start thinking about what can
[Guest]: you do differently.
[Guest]: And I'll talk about the property tax reform that we did at that point of time.
[Guest]: How you can make a difference in the public space with innovative ideas from outside.
[Guest]: The reason for patron saint for lost causes, after 17 years, well, we have Bangalore's
[Guest]: traffic, we have Bangalore's potholes, and a whole lot more.
[Guest]: So at one level, it's a lost cause in the sense that it's not getting fixed.
[Guest]: But at another level, even when you make an inch of positive movement in the space, it
[Guest]: gives you a whole lot of confidence that change is possible.
[Guest]: And that's the reason I've been at it for 17 years in Bangalore and some other cities.
[Amit Varma]: And even an inch of positive movement in the context and given the scale is actually a
[Guest]: heck of a lot of...
[Guest]: I think so.
[Guest]: In fact, I think you're going to see change in the space incrementally, marginally better
[Guest]: tomorrow compared to things.
[Guest]: I don't think you're going to see a dramatic day and night difference in urban governance.
[Guest]: And here, actually, I'd like to take, for example, the property tax that I mentioned
[Guest]: earlier.
[Guest]: Now, back in 2000, before that, we had a system of property tax, where the revenue inspector
[Guest]: came and decided what tax you needed to pay.
[Guest]: And there was an adjustment between the revenue inspector and the house owner in terms of
[Guest]: the tax paid and the money to be paid to him.
[Guest]: We came up in 2000 with a self-assessment scheme of property tax built on a basic premise.
[Guest]: Trust the citizen to tell the truth, rather than a revenue officer to uncover a lie.
[Guest]: So you make a very simple system by which people can comply.
[Guest]: And what we noticed in that process is that more and more people chose to come forward
[Guest]: under the self-assessment scheme.
[Guest]: And if you see the statistics in Bangalore, property tax over the last 17 years has collections
[Guest]: have jumped over 20 times under the self-assessment scheme.
[Guest]: So the point really is, if you think differently about an issue like property tax, rather than
[Guest]: having a command and control revenue inspector Raj, you have a citizen trusting system, you
[Guest]: suddenly find that change is possible.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, when you told me the story earlier, when we were having breakfast today,
[Amit Varma]: it kind of blew my mind because it's very counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: It's the opposite way people, you know, people in government generally think, oh, we have
[Amit Varma]: to control the citizens, we have to bring them to heel.
[Amit Varma]: And here what you're saying is no, leave him alone, let him self-assess, trust the guy,
[Amit Varma]: he'll do it.
[Amit Varma]: And one reason it worked, of course, as you pointed out, was that under the older rent
[Amit Varma]: seeking regime, you would have a certain amount of money going to bribes and a certain amount
[Amit Varma]: of money going to taxes.
[Amit Varma]: And here, even though the tax collection was higher, because they were paying zero bribes,
[Amit Varma]: they benefited as well by paying less.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Actually, the system started getting more money, and the revenue inspector was starved
[Guest]: of his bribe.
[Guest]: That was the essential reform that we did.
[Guest]: And it worked because citizens loved it.
[Guest]: And the other thing I realized in that process, that once citizens taste something that they
[Guest]: love in the civic space, it's almost very difficult to reverse it.
[Guest]: In fact, the system did try to reverse the self-assessment scheme.
[Guest]: But citizens protested saying, we like it, we want this.
[Guest]: So the way to get change in the civic space is get the citizens to taste the good things
[Guest]: that are possible.
[Guest]: And that's the way change is possible.
[Amit Varma]: How hard was it to, for example, convince people about this kind of thinking when you
[Amit Varma]: first started doing your pro bono evangelism?
[Amit Varma]: Because typically in government, people just want to expand their own power, the incentives
[Amit Varma]: are towards increase your budgets and increase rent seeking opportunities.
[Amit Varma]: And government never actually reduces power or gives up control.
[Amit Varma]: And like this property tax incident, you mentioned itself seems to me almost unbelievable, like
[Amit Varma]: why would they just allow that opportunity for them to go away.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, while you had this one success, do you find that mindsets are an impediment
[Guest]: to getting things done?
[Guest]: Without a doubt.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, it's about power.
[Guest]: It's about money.
[Guest]: There's a whole lot of money riding on projects.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, anecdotally, I've built estimates of the kind of leakage in civic
[Guest]: projects.
[Guest]: And if you include ghost works, the extent of leakage in civic projects is almost about
[Guest]: 50-55%.
[Guest]: That's the level, but including ghost works.
[Guest]: So but typically you can say as a rule of thumb, 25-30% in a project is definitely gone.
[Guest]: So what are ghost works for just for my listeners, because, okay, so I found there were five
[Guest]: categories of ghost works, for example.
[Guest]: So you'll find project works, which you know, there's a reason why they name roads with
[Guest]: new names.
[Guest]: So if you go actually to the project file, there will be one work in the old name of
[Guest]: the road and the same work in the new name of the road.
[Guest]: And unless you know that both the roads are the same, you already created one ghost work.
[Guest]: I have seen projects which say that while going northwards, the left side of the road,
[Guest]: and the same road project being described going the other way as the right side of the
[Guest]: road.
[Guest]: So that's another one.
[Guest]: Then another one, you have private sector people coming and saying, I will do this road
[Guest]: for you.
[Guest]: Now, the civic system waits for that road to be completed as a donation by the private
[Guest]: sector.
[Guest]: And then they raise the same thing as a job in their works, because the work's already
[Guest]: done.
[Guest]: And that's another kind of ghost work and I could go on.
[Guest]: The problem really is we have a pretty dysfunctional system and it's a long road back to fix it.
[Guest]: And corruption and this is clearly one important thing to deal with.
[Guest]: The other thing really is we want to bring change in this place.
[Guest]: I think if you ask for change in terms of giving up power, etc., it's not going to happen.
[Guest]: So you have to work in terms of making the benefit case for the person doing it.
[Guest]: So for example, I hate to say it, but they like projects.
[Guest]: So if they see the possible projects at the end of this road, for example, in the case
[Guest]: of property tax, the reason why they don't mind getting more money is the ability to
[Guest]: do more projects.
[Guest]: So they are okay with doing this because they know their downstream benefits with more money
[Amit Varma]: in the system.
[Amit Varma]: That's a very perverse kind of reality check for me, because what it means is that whenever
[Amit Varma]: you then sell a plan or a project to these guys, you're not selling it to them because
[Amit Varma]: it's good for the citizens.
[Amit Varma]: You're selling it to them.
[Amit Varma]: You're keeping their own self-interest in mind that, hey, I love projects at the end
[Amit Varma]: of this, or I'll be, you know, I love this much more.
[Guest]: We don't know.
[Guest]: I mean, they have that in mind because they are able to smell the opportunities.
[Guest]: In fact, we are naive.
[Guest]: We are just saying these are good things to do.
[Guest]: And their mind is clicking away saying, what are the possible downstream benefits of doing
[Amit Varma]: this?
[Amit Varma]: But over time, I guess you do keep into account how they are looking at it as well.
[Guest]: Without a doubt.
[Guest]: In fact, I keep saying, you know, the problem with a lot of theoreticians who give suggestions
[Guest]: in the civic space, they come from what I call a systems theory outlook.
[Guest]: In a systems theory, it's this orderly world, everybody knows their place and things are
[Guest]: happening in an orderly way.
[Guest]: I always say that in this space, very crudely, we need a modified game theory.
[Guest]: Everybody has an agenda.
[Guest]: They have their own goals and objectives.
[Guest]: And the trick to get good outcomes, good people wanting good outcomes have to understand everyone's
[Guest]: motivation and find an alignment of stars of these diverse group of people, which gets
[Guest]: you the good outcomes, but they believe that they're getting what they want.
[Guest]: So I really feel that we need this whole new science to develop of what I crudely call
[Guest]: modified game theory.
[Guest]: Because frankly, to sit back and say people must be good, they must do good things is
[Guest]: not going to happen.
[Guest]: So we have to realize it's an imperfect world.
[Guest]: And as I mentioned earlier, dysfunctional setup, the trick is to really figure out how
[Guest]: to navigate this system and still get some good out there.
[Amit Varma]: That seems deeply complex, because you have all these self-interested actors acting in
[Amit Varma]: their own self-interest very rationally with different ends.
[Amit Varma]: And to find a way to sort of nudge them in the same direction, it seems a very hard task.
[Amit Varma]: Let me...
[Guest]: Sorry.
[Guest]: So there actually, Amit, I'd like to come in, for example, lots of people mentioned
[Guest]: that a directly elected mayor in the city is the way to go, for instance, which is really
[Guest]: the second tier of state government giving their powers to the third tier of city government.
[Guest]: Not going to happen because this is where the power lies, but you want them to give
[Guest]: away power.
[Guest]: In fact, I think there's even a private member's bill in parliament seeking directly elected
[Guest]: mayor.
[Guest]: It's not going to happen.
[Guest]: But if you start thinking about how it could potentially happen, if you look at our history,
[Guest]: Sardar Patel, Nehru, Rajendra Prasad, they're all city mayors.
[Guest]: They cut their teeth in city government before they went to state and national politics.
[Guest]: So the way potentially to think about directly elected mayor is if we got the political dynasties
[Guest]: of different parties, their children to convince their parents that I could be the mayor of
[Guest]: the city, let's go for that route.
[Guest]: And if they did it across parties, it has a greater chance of you getting the directly
[Guest]: elected mayor because different political scions of political families are saying this
[Guest]: is the way to go.
[Guest]: Then saying that the state must give away power to the third tier of city government
[Guest]: because that is not going to happen.
[Guest]: So this is my example of thinking in terms of what could motivate people to give away
[Guest]: power to a third tier that lies with the political system.
[Amit Varma]: And we've got to figure out how to make that happen.
[Amit Varma]: Which is very interesting and pragmatic and something I hadn't thought of where what you're
[Amit Varma]: essentially saying is that there are limits to democratic advocacy within the system.
[Amit Varma]: So instead you subverted by talking to the privileged elite so that they can use some
[Guest]: of the privilege and taking the system in the direction that I don't want to be considered
[Guest]: as a subversive guy.
[Guest]: It's just about being pragmatic.
[Guest]: As you said, we all know that you need the city, you need somebody accountable, a directly
[Guest]: elected mayor.
[Guest]: That's the way to go.
[Guest]: Everybody by and large agrees that the question is, how do we get there?
[Guest]: And to me, anything that gets us to a good outcome of that kind is worth considering.
[Amit Varma]: And that's where I was coming to.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, people could make the philosophical argument at the end never justifies the means
[Amit Varma]: and therefore blah, blah, blah.
[Guest]: But anyway, the pragmatic guy in this space, because I'm very clear that, you know, the
[Guest]: ecosystem is quite compromised and it's extremely difficult to make the moral argument to do
[Guest]: the right thing.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So we have to navigate this minefield.
[Amit Varma]: So your sense would be, look, there's too much at stake and we have to be practical
[Amit Varma]: and get things done somehow.
[Amit Varma]: That's my belief.
[Amit Varma]: However we can.
[Amit Varma]: So let me now take you back to a broader fundamental question.
[Amit Varma]: What is wrong with our cities today, the way they are governed?
[Guest]: See first thing is there's no one in charge of the city to carry on with something I said
[Guest]: earlier.
[Guest]: I think that's the fundamental thing.
[Guest]: It is too much under the state's control.
[Guest]: So whether it's Bombay or Bangalore or Chennai, which has a problem, let's say it could be
[Guest]: flooding portals or whatever, you will find invariably the chief minister of the state
[Guest]: talking about it.
[Guest]: And that's the problem.
[Guest]: Why should the state chief minister who is the state chief minister be answering questions
[Guest]: about traffic and portals in a city?
[Guest]: It's not his remit or her remit.
[Guest]: So I think we don't have clear cut accountability and somebody in charge of the city's destiny.
[Guest]: That's the start point.
[Guest]: Our governance and administration structure is, those institutions have collapsed.
[Guest]: There was a 74th constitutional amendment.
[Guest]: We had the 73rd of Panchayati Raj for rural areas and 74th for cities.
[Guest]: That hasn't worked.
[Guest]: There's hardly any state that has implemented it.
[Guest]: So we now need to go back to the drawing board and come up with a governance and administration
[Guest]: framework for cities that can work.
[Guest]: Then there is a challenge of human resources and capacity.
[Guest]: You know, this World Bank came up with this thing that capacity building is the way out.
[Guest]: I think it's just a thing for getting consultants jobs because the reality is what we have got
[Guest]: in the system to work with is extremely weak clay or quicksand and therefore to mold it
[Guest]: is very difficult.
[Guest]: So we need a fresh infusion of ideas.
[Guest]: We need to think about human resources differently.
[Guest]: We need to think of lateral recruitment.
[Guest]: We need to think of a commissioner who comes from outside and becomes a city commissioner.
[Guest]: So we need some transformational thinking in this space.
[Guest]: The other thing about cities where everybody is making a mistake is they are trying to
[Guest]: fix yesterday's problems unsuccessfully.
[Guest]: Band-Aid solutions.
[Guest]: We're not planning ahead.
[Guest]: What we really need to do if Bangalore is to work, the extended region has to work internationally.
[Guest]: The focus is on city regions.
[Guest]: London works because it's housed in the South England region.
[Guest]: Same as the case with New York.
[Guest]: So if you improve Bangalore, even marginally, another half a million people will come into
[Guest]: Bangalore and the place will collapse again.
[Guest]: So unless you have a regional clusters that work as live and work, you're not going to
[Guest]: fix this problem.
[Guest]: So the way we do our plans, they are also quite messed up in terms of...
[Guest]: So the master plan is nothing but a land use plan.
[Guest]: It's about there's a price for the color by which various land parcels get covered.
[Guest]: What you need are strategic spatial plans.
[Guest]: We are nowhere there.
[Guest]: I could go on and on.
[Guest]: We tried to fix the inner city.
[Guest]: The periphery is going for a six.
[Guest]: We need a municipalization strategy to deal with the periphery.
[Guest]: So there's a whole range of problems, lots of moving parts that need to be worked on
[Guest]: when you try to fix this.
[Guest]: I think really governments have to figure out where do they want to start in this journey
[Guest]: and start doing something about it.
[Guest]: That's really the need of the hour.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll come back to regional clusters in a bit.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I want to ask you both about regional clusters and your City Connect program, which
[Amit Varma]: you carried out so successfully before that.
[Amit Varma]: But just to go back to the fundamental question, like I had done an episode of the scene and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen with Shruti Rajgopalan, the economist and legal scholar, and we'd spoken about open
[Amit Varma]: governance.
[Amit Varma]: One of the points that she made was that the incentives are skewed because the people who
[Amit Varma]: have the power to actually do something in cities aren't accountable to you.
[Amit Varma]: And the people who are accountable to you, your local corporators who you vote for directly,
[Amit Varma]: don't have the power to do anything.
[Amit Varma]: And you can't expect anyone to actually give away power, like you can't expect state governments
[Amit Varma]: to then say that, oh, okay, we'll empower the cities and therefore there'll be less
[Amit Varma]: money to buy votes from rural regions, which crudely put is what it comes down to.
[Amit Varma]: Elections are all about bribing voters, essentially in one form or the other.
[Guest]: That's true.
[Guest]: For example, I have met MLAs who actually want to run the city and are running the city.
[Guest]: And you ask yourself, essentially, when you got elected as an MLA, you signed up for the
[Guest]: state legislature and to frame laws and the like.
[Guest]: If you wanted to run the city, you should be a corporator or a mayor.
[Guest]: That's the whole point.
[Guest]: So our whole setup is really messed up in terms of things.
[Guest]: And it's a fact that, and when it comes to the corporator, you get into this whole area
[Guest]: of petty corruption, you know, people say that you don't know where the corporator ends
[Guest]: and the contractor begins.
[Guest]: And you then, so consequently, every time I see a pothole, I see that nexus at work.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in Bombay, I'm amazed that people expect potholes to be permanently fixed.
[Amit Varma]: It's not going to happen because it's in the corporator contractors nexus to make sure
[Amit Varma]: that roads are repaired so badly that potholes come up again and more repairs are required.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: In fact, in Bangalore, we have actually doing a project called Tender SURE, SURE stands
[Guest]: for Specification for Urban Road Execution under our City Connect platform, where we
[Guest]: have made the case that if you build your road right with stormwater drains and pedestrian
[Guest]: footpaths, underground utilities, and take a life cycle cost view to the investment,
[Guest]: you actually end up spending much less than the half yearly pothole filling exercise model
[Guest]: that we have got.
[Guest]: And we have said that if you get it right, it will cost you more upfront.
[Guest]: But within four to five years, you have a payback after which you're in the positive
[Guest]: zone.
[Guest]: Now, the system doesn't like it.
[Guest]: We have pulled off a few roads in the in the city.
[Guest]: But there again, the betting has been that citizens will like the roads and say that
[Guest]: we want similar roads in our neighborhood as the way to change.
[Guest]: But the system per se does not like it.
[Guest]: Because it goes against the repair model every six months where there's a whole lot of money
[Amit Varma]: right.
[Amit Varma]: So my question then is to come back from the earlier point about power and accountability
[Amit Varma]: being in separate hands, that as then a citizen reformer within the system as you have been
[Amit Varma]: for so many years, what is your approach because the people who have the power are very different
[Amit Varma]: from the people who have the accountability?
[Amit Varma]: How do you navigate that?
[Guest]: So the thing really is, you have to understand who's got in fact, some of us have been working
[Guest]: in this space have been criticized by NGOs and civil society groups saying, why are you
[Guest]: spending so much time convincing the state government to do this and that you should
[Guest]: be investing more energy with the corporator.
[Guest]: But the reality is, if you can get change happening through the state government route,
[Guest]: that's where you spend your time till the system is changed, where the power lies with
[Guest]: the city government.
[Guest]: So we do get criticized, saying that this group prefers to sit with the chief minister
[Guest]: and solve the problem, rather than sit with the corporator.
[Guest]: But the way I look at it is the following.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, of course, currently in Karnataka, the chief minister is not the
[Guest]: minister for Bangalore, but for the longest time, the chief minister was also the minister
[Guest]: for Bangalore.
[Guest]: And at one level, it could be argued that if he's the minister for Bangalore, he's the
[Guest]: place that you go to get change done, which is really the state government.
[Guest]: My sense really is, for those of us who are spending time trying to bring about change,
[Guest]: you try to spend time in places where you can make the change happen in terms of things
[Guest]: till such time that the system itself, the architecture is changed, so that the true
[Guest]: power resides in the third tier of city government, ward committees, ward planning actually take
[Guest]: shape in reality.
[Guest]: That day is a long way off.
[Guest]: We need to get there.
[Guest]: And many of us who are working in the space are battling for those kinds of ideas.
[Guest]: But while we battle for those ideas to take root, we at the same time, figure out how
[Guest]: to improve mobility, how to get pedestrian walkable footpaths, how to do a better property
[Guest]: tax system and the like, because you need to bring change on multiple fronts.
[Amit Varma]: In other words, we can't let the perfect be the enemy of the good.
[Amit Varma]: You know, while that perfect state of being is a long way away, we still have to keep
[Amit Varma]: working.
[Amit Varma]: And would it then be fair to say that since administration is really a chain of joggers,
[Amit Varma]: where you do little band-aids from time to time, what you try to do besides tackling
[Amit Varma]: the root cause, which is a long-term project, what you also try to do is influence the specific
[Amit Varma]: band-aids that are put and try to sell them and make sure that they're at least better
[Amit Varma]: band-aids and make a long-term...
[Guest]: So I have a term for it, you know, North by Northwest, like the movie.
[Guest]: See, we know that we need to head north.
[Guest]: That's the route, the goal.
[Guest]: And often you have the, I mean, a crow would say, I'll fly north straight.
[Guest]: But in real life, the way to north may be north by northwest, and that's fine.
[Guest]: It's when some of the things you're doing as taking you south, then you have to stop
[Guest]: and say, hello, what am I doing out here?
[Guest]: And this is not the right thing.
[Guest]: So that's the kind of compass that should guide you as you work in this space.
[Amit Varma]: Let's now talk about CityConnect.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me more about CityConnect.
[Guest]: So CityConnect is an idea which has been about 11, 12 years old.
[Guest]: It started in Bangalore, and today it's there in Chennai, Trivandrum, Panjim, and Pune,
[Guest]: five cities.
[Guest]: See, when you look at a city, you realize that there's one stakeholder who has really
[Guest]: not participated in the city development, and that is the business industry, the corporates.
[Guest]: They crib about the city, they say it doesn't work.
[Guest]: They say, I pay my taxes, the city better work.
[Guest]: So they're really giving those kinds of press statements, which doesn't help the cause.
[Guest]: None of them have been into the belly of the beast, which is local government, and realize
[Guest]: that it's impossible for this system to fix the place and give them the kind of city that
[Guest]: they desire, but they don't know it, and they crib.
[Guest]: So the idea of CityConnect was to tell business, look, guys, the system is broken, and unless
[Guest]: you find a way to get involved in the system in a positive manner, and for things which
[Guest]: are larger than your company, it's not about the road to your company.
[Guest]: It's about the largest city, fixing the city, pollution, roads, and drainage, sewerage,
[Guest]: the works, and also the public spaces.
[Guest]: You have to embrace an idea larger than yourself, or before you realize it, you will find that
[Guest]: your best talent are leaving your firm.
[Guest]: And why did they leave?
[Guest]: Because their spouses told them, this city doesn't work for us and our children, let's
[Amit Varma]: go somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: They are actually in the long-term interest to work for the city because network effects,
[Guest]: more talent will come in if the city is better.
[Guest]: And for the individual company, they'll be able to retain talent and attract talent if
[Guest]: the ecosystem works.
[Guest]: And I tell companies, your involvement in the space and the money you spend, I don't
[Guest]: want it from your CSR.
[Guest]: You're doing no favor as a social responsibility.
[Guest]: I want it as a balance sheet item in terms of I'm investing this kind of money for a
[Guest]: better city.
[Guest]: It's a cost item to make a better city.
[Guest]: The payback on the top line by a city which is productive and that works, it'll more than
[Guest]: pay anything that you invest in the city, in improving the city.
[Guest]: And in what way can you improve the city?
[Guest]: So the CityConnect platform is a bunch of business leaders.
[Guest]: Typically, I look for about four to six committed people who believe in the idea.
[Guest]: The platform has scope for everybody to be on it.
[Guest]: Resident welfare associations, NGOs, citizens, and the like.
[Guest]: But basically, as the elite, it's the corporate's responsibility to take ownership and make
[Guest]: it happen.
[Guest]: They definitely bring in money not to do one road, but to prove a concept, basically proof
[Guest]: of ideas on the ground, spend money on designs and drawings.
[Guest]: The big money is spent by government.
[Guest]: And that's how we did the Tender Shore Road.
[Guest]: So we did the designs.
[Guest]: And therefore, the compact with this local government is, I will bring in expertise in
[Guest]: a non-threatening manner and in a non-dictatorial manner that you better do this.
[Guest]: And can we collaborate so that we try new models to do better roads or better drainage
[Guest]: of fixing the lake problem so that we can collectively improve.
[Amit Varma]: So can you elaborate on that illustration you gave me of the roads that you designed
[Guest]: and which were then?
[Guest]: Yes, about a decade ago, the most successful example in Bangalore is what's called the
[Guest]: Tender Shore Roads.
[Guest]: So in the Tender Shore Road has a core idea that we need to build the road around pedestrians
[Guest]: and not around motorists.
[Guest]: The problem today is we have a motorist oriented thinking when it comes to the roads.
[Guest]: But actually, if you think about it, half of a city like Bangalore moves in public transport
[Guest]: buses.
[Guest]: Now, guys don't fly into buses and fly out of buses.
[Guest]: They walk on footpaths to reach it.
[Guest]: The invisible lacks in our cities, the informal labor, etc., they walk on footpaths which
[Guest]: are non-existent.
[Guest]: So when you think about it, even electorally, it's actually good politics to build good
[Guest]: footpaths, but we have never done it.
[Guest]: We always try to cater to the motorized vehicles.
[Guest]: So the idea here was two or three ideas.
[Guest]: One idea is pedestrian at the heart of the, what does that mean?
[Guest]: Wider footpaths, pedestrians cross at grade, not taking them over bridges.
[Guest]: And when there's a conflict, you rule in favor of the pedestrian.
[Guest]: You have a hierarchy, pedestrian, cyclists, bus transport, and then the motor vehicles.
[Guest]: Motor vehicles will get uniform lanes end to end, but that's all they will get.
[Guest]: Today, they're getting just about everywhere you get space, they're pouring tar, which
[Guest]: is a dumb way to do things.
[Guest]: The second concept in what we did as an idea is to think life cycle costs.
[Guest]: Instead of doing the six monthly pothole repair, you actually spend more money upfront, redo
[Guest]: the drains, redo the power lines and the sewerage lines, and spend more, but you don't have
[Guest]: repair work.
[Guest]: And then you do contracts, which are five years maintenance all built in.
[Guest]: Now, for example, if you take the recent Bangalore flooding, which we saw in the last one and
[Guest]: a half months, lots of areas getting flooded, the streets that actually worked were the
[Guest]: seven Tendershaw streets, their waters got drained away, there are no potholes on those
[Guest]: roads.
[Guest]: It works.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a proof of concept.
[Amit Varma]: So how did it come about like, okay, conceptually, you explained to me the thinking that was
[Amit Varma]: behind designing such roads.
[Guest]: But how did it come about out of CityConnect?
[Guest]: How did you persuade people?
[Guest]: So as I mentioned, so CityConnect is this body, which is, I mean, for example, in the
[Guest]: case of Bangalore, it has a Kiran Mazumdar Shah, Chris Gopalakrishnan and a few other
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: What that group has got, has got access to the system.
[Guest]: So when they speak, the system listens, and that's the big role they play.
[Guest]: There are people like us who actually are willing to run around and get and implement
[Guest]: some of these ideas, but you need access to people to listen.
[Guest]: So the proposition to the chief secretary that we made on the platform really was this
[Guest]: idea that we will not give gyan, we will spend money on doing the designs.
[Guest]: All we seek from you is you will do a pilot trial of two roads based on designs on which
[Guest]: we will spend money on.
[Guest]: So that's how it started.
[Guest]: It took us about a year to put that whole thing together.
[Guest]: When we went back to the chief secretary, he said the idea is much larger.
[Guest]: Let's get also a political clearance for the idea.
[Guest]: We went to the then chief minister, who said, look, this sounds great.
[Guest]: Why are you looking at two roads, we'll do 50 roads like this.
[Guest]: That's how it started.
[Guest]: And on the City Connect platform, what's now happened, we spent 85 lakh rupees of the City
[Guest]: Connect money got from industry on the designs, the manual and the like.
[Guest]: In return, the city is now going to get, has already got about 85 crores worth of roads
[Guest]: and commitment wise, we have 600 crores worth of roads on that principle.
[Guest]: So the power to get the right thing done.
[Guest]: And what's it at the end of the day?
[Guest]: It has two core ideas.
[Guest]: Pedestrians should be able to walk without fear and with comfort.
[Guest]: And second, once done, we don't have to repeatedly repair the roads, two ideas behind that project.
[Guest]: And evangelized in this manner, and I want to repeat, if you want to really get things
[Guest]: done in the system, don't lecture, don't give gyan.
[Guest]: Be ready to work as a partner along with them.
[Guest]: Know your place in the overall ecosystem, then it gets accepted.
[Guest]: But if you talk down, I know more, you better listen to me, that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: People may nod in the room, but they'll kill the project outside.
[Guest]: So you have to find ways to collaborate in a healthy, friendly manner with these people
[Amit Varma]: to go in there with humility and work hard.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the cynic in me would say that I've seen so many civic initiatives break down
[Amit Varma]: over the years because of diffuse responsibility or because of the free rider effect that you
[Amit Varma]: might go to these captains of industry and they will say, hey, great idea.
[Amit Varma]: I support you.
[Amit Varma]: But they'll expect someone else to actually do the hard work and, you know, put themselves
[Amit Varma]: out there.
[Amit Varma]: But what you had with City Connect is you've actually had these captains of industry getting
[Amit Varma]: involved at a level deeper than that.
[Guest]: There's a reason for that.
[Guest]: If you actually see the kind of people who come on board across the cities and their
[Guest]: captains and leaders, they are invested in the city long term.
[Guest]: They expect their children and grandchildren to be in the city.
[Guest]: That's very important.
[Guest]: In contrast, you have industry people who flit from city to city, here today, there
[Guest]: tomorrow, gone day after, whatever.
[Guest]: They, for example, they just, it's a plug and play people.
[Guest]: They just want to come in, plug in and expect the place to work.
[Guest]: So you can't expect them to get too emotionally involved with the city.
[Guest]: So even in constructing such a platform, you need to find people who are vested in the
[Guest]: city long term, only then it works.
[Guest]: Because they also believe that, in fact, when I go and evangelize, because I've gone and
[Guest]: evangelize this across 10 cities and crafted it in five cities, I tell people, if you're
[Guest]: not willing to commit a minimum of a decade to the idea, don't enter.
[Guest]: So I tell them at the door itself, unless you're willing to think that you're going
[Guest]: to stay with this for the long term, don't even sign up for the idea of City Connect.
[Amit Varma]: So by making that clear at the start, you sort of ensure that the people who join are
[Amit Varma]: right.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, let's move on to talking about the future of cities and what you were talking
[Amit Varma]: about these expanded sort of regional zones where cities in a sense, become the hub of
[Amit Varma]: urban networks.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that you think is organically happening anyway?
[Amit Varma]: Or is that something that you think needs to be proactively planned for and enabled?
[Guest]: It is happening organically, but in a very haphazard manner.
[Guest]: It needs to actually happen in a proactive plan manners, the way it needs to happen.
[Guest]: So really, when I say it's happening in a haphazard manner, pockets are developing in
[Guest]: different places.
[Guest]: Take a simple thing, according to me, the Ministry of Industries and the Ministry of
[Guest]: Urban Development at the state level need to be together.
[Guest]: Because frankly speaking, a new industrial area, it's not about just the factory, people
[Guest]: have to live there, they have to have educational schools, social infrastructure.
[Guest]: And in the silos of government agency, you say that somebody else's problem.
[Guest]: So you need a thinking, which, and that's the problem in governance.
[Guest]: We want outcomes, outcomes invariably are across multiple silos of government.
[Guest]: And integration is the biggest challenge.
[Guest]: And in our flawed system, that integrator is the chief minister and the chief secretary.
[Guest]: Any one level below, nobody is able to do that role.
[Guest]: So unless we crack the code on how we are going to build a governance administration
[Guest]: architecture that cuts across this, the future of cities and urban areas in India is bleak.
[Guest]: I believe, you know, we have put out a paper called the Game Changers.
[Guest]: I have about 12 to 15 ideas as game changers for future cities.
[Guest]: Broadly, very quickly, I'll try and give the big points.
[Guest]: One is you need to think in terms of city region, you want to fix a city, have a regional
[Guest]: thinking.
[Guest]: So if you're thinking of fixing Bangalore, look at the Bangalore larger metropolitan
[Guest]: regional area, which is 8000 square kilometers, almost 11 12 times Bangalore size, look at
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Second, the periphery is got the most unplanned growth, because they don't come under the
[Guest]: civic system, which has all said and done some kind of rules and procedures.
[Guest]: You need a municipalization strategy to deal with the periphery.
[Guest]: For larger cities, you have to break the city corporation into smaller corporations.
[Guest]: For example, if you take a place like Bangalore, 198 wards, 80% of them have never spoken in
[Guest]: five years in the council meetings, and they just travel in Bangalore's traffic to the
[Guest]: council hall, waste of time, decentralize and do things at the ward level, what can
[Guest]: be done at the ward level with citizen participation, integrate what you need to do at the city
[Guest]: level like transport and the like.
[Guest]: Another thing really is planning.
[Guest]: We have static land use planning, terrible.
[Guest]: It is absolutely terrible.
[Guest]: And it just gives you rules and regulations to manage land use.
[Guest]: We need a master plan that actually embraces ideas on mobility, water, sanitation, environment
[Guest]: and the like.
[Guest]: Not happening currently.
[Guest]: We need to do something out there.
[Guest]: Land acquisition is a big problem as we go forward.
[Guest]: We need to come up with innovative land pooling mechanisms, you know, that town planning schemes,
[Guest]: a whole lot of methods.
[Guest]: We tend to still think of one more outer ring road as a strip development.
[Guest]: We need to think of area based development and innovative ways to be able to procure
[Guest]: land for public purposes.
[Guest]: Data, information, we don't have observatories at all.
[Guest]: We don't have a culture of respect for data.
[Guest]: We need a spatial data center.
[Guest]: Today, if you go to most agencies, everybody has their own GIS map.
[Guest]: How can a city have 10 maps floating around?
[Guest]: There's only one base map.
[Guest]: You need a spatial center which takes care of that.
[Guest]: I could go on and on.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are a whole lot of other ideas.
[Amit Varma]: Please do go on and on, we have time.
[Guest]: So that's another thing that we can do.
[Guest]: The other thing which is important in this space, for example, is we're not paying enough
[Guest]: attention to maintenance.
[Guest]: There's a lot of excitement in creating assets, the point we spoke earlier about projects
[Guest]: because there's scope for kickback money in projects.
[Guest]: But actually, we don't budget enough for maintenance of those assets.
[Guest]: So we have a lot of decaying assets across our cities.
[Guest]: Another good principle to adopt as we go forward to change our cities is we must sweat our
[Guest]: existing assets.
[Guest]: For example, we have the commuter rail in many cities.
[Guest]: Now, many of those tracks are utilized maybe for two or three hours a day.
[Guest]: Now, if we can get more trains to run for local services on those racks, I'm sure that
[Guest]: technical problems, of course, the biggest problem is railways is central government
[Guest]: and this is silo issues, then it's central state, which is even more complicated.
[Guest]: But if you adopt the principle of sweating your existing assets, you'll start thinking
[Guest]: differently.
[Guest]: For example, I always felt that while we had BIL, we should have also had HAL airport.
[Guest]: BIL could run HAL airport, but don't deprive the city of an existing asset and people could
[Guest]: fly into different airports depending on the willingness to pay more or whatever, rather
[Guest]: than be dumb and say, I'm shutting it down under some MOU in terms of things.
[Guest]: So we need to think more innovatively and differently.
[Guest]: You want to fix, for example, transport and mobility keeps coming back.
[Guest]: Because we see on mobility, there is no fix and many cities and state governments don't
[Guest]: seem to get it.
[Guest]: Public transport and huge investment in public transport and walkable footpaths is the only
[Guest]: way to fix mobility problems.
[Guest]: Today, for example, I'll just give you a quick Bangalore statistic.
[Guest]: Bangalore, they roughly say from available data, citizens make about a hundred lakh trips
[Guest]: per day.
[Guest]: Fifty lakh trips of these are made in the buses.
[Guest]: Three lakh trips are made in the metro.
[Guest]: And the balance, roughly 50% are made in 50 lakh private vehicles.
[Guest]: And the 50 lakh trips in buses is made in 6,500 buses.
[Guest]: So you have 6,500 buses that carries half of Bangalore every day.
[Guest]: And the other half of Bangalore travels in close to 50 lakh vehicles.
[Guest]: Now common sense will tell you that if I went to 10,000 or 12,000 buses and did route rationalization,
[Guest]: I could go from a 50% modal share for transport to maybe a 70% modal share.
[Guest]: And then you watch the magic on the road.
[Guest]: But what we find our leadership are pandering to motorized vehicles.
[Guest]: I am not saying motorized vehicles don't have a place.
[Guest]: By all means, it's an aspirational thing and people should buy it if they can afford it.
[Guest]: But as public policy, your job is to give them some space to drive, but promote public
[Guest]: transport as the core thing of your mobility policy.
[Amit Varma]: And it's of course an old sword that you don't judge the modernity of a city by the quality
[Amit Varma]: of the private vehicles, but by the quality of its public transport.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: In fact, another one, which is a really a moral hazard, if I can call it that, take
[Guest]: the whole issue of solid waste management.
[Guest]: We don't think anything about Bangalore, for instance, a city of 10 million, its garbage
[Guest]: is dumped on the outskirts in villages of 5,000, polluting their water forever, their
[Guest]: crops and a whole lot of things and health and sanitation problems in those areas.
[Guest]: Is it right to even do this?
[Guest]: We have to embrace a policy like I spoke about mobility, where we have to say that landfills
[Guest]: will get only about 10 to 15% of the waste and the rest will get resolved.
[Guest]: I keep saying that what we need to embrace are two really slogans.
[Guest]: The old hum do humare do needs to become the segregation policy, wet waste and dry waste
[Guest]: segregated source because without segregation, you don't have a solution for waste internationally.
[Guest]: Second is what happens in Vegas stays in Vegas.
[Guest]: So my garbage must be resolved in my locality or the extended locality near my area and
[Guest]: not in a village, 40 kilometers away, out of sight, out of mind.
[Guest]: So this, for example, is another thing that we need to embrace and go down that route
[Guest]: and hammer away till we get there.
[Guest]: Now these are known and these are wicked problems to solve.
[Guest]: But all the time, what happens is you suddenly have some problem on potholes.
[Guest]: They will and that's the system loves because you have rapid release of funds, drop processes
[Guest]: to select contractors and say, fill it up, fill it up, etc.
[Guest]: And then that's again money down the drain, because in the next rain comes, it again opens
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: So to cut a long story short, I mean, there's a whole lot of game changers that one can
[Guest]: go for in fixing the future of cities.
[Guest]: It has a mix at the larger level.
[Guest]: As I keep saying, there's the governance that needs to be thing, which is really city needs
[Guest]: to be in control of its own destiny.
[Guest]: It clearly needs its own leadership.
[Guest]: I personally believe that the directly elected mayor is the way to go to get there.
[Guest]: I know we will get scared when we see our corporators and say, oh my God, this guy is
[Guest]: a mayor or something.
[Guest]: But trust me that if you incentivize the third tier of city government with true powers,
[Guest]: the right kind of people will stand for those posts because the incentives will drive them
[Guest]: saying it's worth my time to cut my teeth in city government.
[Guest]: So the start really, so there are governance issues.
[Guest]: On the administration side, I really believe that we need a municipal cadre.
[Guest]: It's a specialist job and we are sitting with generalists.
[Guest]: Won't work.
[Guest]: Environmental issues, for example, are serious town planning.
[Guest]: Most cities don't have qualified transport planners, don't have qualified town planners.
[Guest]: How are you going to get the city you wish?
[Guest]: So we have to address that whole issue.
[Guest]: I really believe that laterals, we need to have a policy.
[Guest]: I believe osmosis between people in government with people in private for both parties.
[Guest]: If they had a chance to work together, it would change both parties.
[Guest]: That's my belief.
[Guest]: So I believe that that's another thing that we should encourage going forward.
[Guest]: I'm sorry, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: I've been rambling a whole lot.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just wrapped because a lot of these are both eye opening and mind blowing ideas for
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: It's a lot to process.
[Amit Varma]: And I also love the way you figured out, you know, a language to communicate these like
[Amit Varma]: hum do humare do and what happens in Vegas stays in Vegas, which is perfect.
[Amit Varma]: So my sort of my next question, therefore, is that when you try to communicate these
[Amit Varma]: ideas and the overall thinking behind these ideas to the governing class, is it that they're
[Amit Varma]: not receptive at all because they're trapped in old ways of thinking or is it that they
[Amit Varma]: are sometimes receptive?
[Amit Varma]: But the in their incentives in the silos they inhabit are the way they are and there's not
[Guest]: much.
[Guest]: I think it's more of the latter.
[Guest]: They realize that some of this holds the answer for the future.
[Guest]: Somehow they feel powerless.
[Guest]: You know, the problem seems so huge and invariably when you deal with them on a one on one basis,
[Guest]: the person across the table agrees with you.
[Guest]: I know this needs to be done, but immediately the defense mechanism kicks in saying, but
[Guest]: that and that is in somebody else's hands, you know, I agree.
[Guest]: But you know, how do we get everybody to work together to make this happen?
[Guest]: So I really believe, hopefully we need a new leadership that's coming out there, both political
[Guest]: and in the bureaucracy, who says that, look, this is something I'd like to take head on
[Guest]: and I'd like to give it the requisite leadership.
[Guest]: What we are handicapped by is that political leader who may be in charge of the city gets
[Guest]: changed at one level.
[Guest]: The bureaucrat definitely will get changed and will go to fisheries or some other department
[Guest]: and we have to start all over again.
[Guest]: The funny thing that's happened for some of us who work in the system, we are holding
[Guest]: the collective knowledge of what has preceded in the last two decades on the space and what's
[Guest]: worked and not worked.
[Guest]: And invariably when a new person comes, we again go with that toolkit and say, look,
[Guest]: so you reinvent the wheel, reinvent the wheel.
[Guest]: So it's one step forward, two step backwards, et cetera.
[Guest]: I really believe the way out really is we need a little more thing from the leadership.
[Guest]: The other thing government needs to realize, the way I see it, is there's a huge trust
[Guest]: deficit between government and the citizen.
[Guest]: One of the reasons that property tax compliance, for example, is low, it's 50% or less, is
[Guest]: the citizen takes the view that government is going to misuse my money.
[Guest]: So better I cheat the government by not paying my due share of taxes, then allow them have
[Guest]: my money and cheat me.
[Guest]: So I personally feel that we need to find a way to bridge this trust deficit.
[Guest]: Which brings me to the other big thing, which is very badly required, transparency.
[Guest]: To me, you have to have increased transparency.
[Guest]: You know, I think it was a Supreme Court justice in the US who said that transparency is the
[Guest]: best, or sunlight is the best disinfectant, is the same transparency idea.
[Guest]: What people need to realize that the more transparent you are, you know, I have another
[Guest]: analogy since I've been giving you some stories, I might as well say this one also, what's
[Guest]: happening in our political system.
[Guest]: And you know, somebody keeps talking about China, things happen, and it's not happening
[Guest]: out here.
[Guest]: You see, when you get elected, I say you get elected with leadership to a lake.
[Guest]: And you start with fishing rights in the lake, that pond, if I can call it that.
[Guest]: Now, normally in the private sector, when you have a small market, you say, how can
[Guest]: I expand the market?
[Guest]: How can I make the pond into a lake, into a river, so that there's more to go around
[Guest]: and a smaller thing will happen.
[Guest]: That's how you start thinking.
[Guest]: Here what happens is, people prefer to fish in the pond that they have got rights to rather
[Guest]: than think about expanding the pond to a lake or a river.
[Guest]: And I've asked politicians this, that why don't you invest to expand, because even a
[Guest]: smaller share of a larger portion will still get you more.
[Guest]: But the politician is thinking is for a limited period of time.
[Guest]: And also, that is one, and people have said this, what if I don't come back?
[Guest]: I would have set the ground for the next guy to fish with more rights.
[Guest]: So I don't want to lay the ground for the next guy's fishing rights.
[Guest]: So I would rather fish.
[Guest]: And that's what you see.
[Guest]: So metaphorically, the frothing and the pollution of our lakes that you see, is essentially
[Guest]: coming from the excessive fishing, using these fishing rights in the pond, rather than thinking
[Guest]: about expanding it into a lake and more.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point.
[Amit Varma]: So like, you know, while society and markets tend to be positive sum games, everybody benefits.
[Amit Varma]: Politicians look upon governance as a zero-sum game, get whatever you can out of it, don't
[Amit Varma]: leave enough for the next guy.
[Amit Varma]: I want to end this podcast by asking you two questions.
[Amit Varma]: One, what makes you hopeful about the future of cities and urban governance in India?
[Amit Varma]: And two, what is the worst case scenario that you're worried about in our country today?
[Guest]: So the first one, really, what makes me hopeful are the few wins that one has personally experienced.
[Guest]: For example, in my own case, the property tax reform that we did, or the tender shore
[Guest]: roads.
[Guest]: These are two things that I've been intimately involved in.
[Guest]: And though that's all I've got to show for 17 years of effort, I'll take it.
[Guest]: So the key thing really here is you need patience and resilience for the long haul.
[Guest]: And for me, it's a passion.
[Guest]: So I'm fine with it.
[Guest]: So that gives me hope that all is not lost, because there are pockets of win that are
[Guest]: visible.
[Guest]: I mean, green shoots or whatever you want to call it.
[Guest]: What worries me, actually, there are two or three things that worry me.
[Guest]: The one that worries me most is the fact that people are coming to cities in search of jobs.
[Guest]: Cities are supposed to be engines of growth and jobs and the like.
[Guest]: And if we don't cater to that, cities tend to die.
[Guest]: I mean, you've seen internationally, whether it was Cleveland, Pittsburgh, Detroit recently
[Guest]: in the West, cities rise, they have heydays and they die.
[Guest]: People think they will never die, but it's happened elsewhere.
[Guest]: And there's no reason to believe it won't happen here.
[Guest]: If we don't deliver on those aspirations of jobs and quality of living, etc., we could
[Guest]: see a fair amount of unrest on the road.
[Guest]: In fact, I really believe that we need city development agencies, for instance, just to
[Guest]: address that job point.
[Guest]: You know, in wave one, we were trying to say, come to India.
[Guest]: If you saw Davos 10, 12 years ago, the slogan was India everywhere.
[Guest]: Today you see state summits in West Karnataka, vibrant Gujarat, emerging Kerala, people trying
[Guest]: to say, come to my state.
[Guest]: The next inevitable wave is going to be cities competing for investments.
[Guest]: So you're going to see that and cities and states that prepare itself earlier by proactively
[Guest]: thinking about jobs, economic development, and I say jobs from the informal sector to
[Guest]: the formal sector.
[Guest]: That's really what's required.
[Guest]: The other thing that worries me and sometimes makes me a tad unhappy as I work in this space,
[Guest]: I believe that we citizens are to blame.
[Guest]: It's easy to blame and throw stones at the system and government and all that.
[Guest]: I think we need to look in the mirror ourselves.
[Guest]: If we did not litter, if we did not jump traffic signals, if we kept to our lane, we could
[Guest]: in our own way, make a big difference.
[Guest]: And so something that I believe that if we are going to fix the city and that worries
[Guest]: me that our civil behavior as manifested in the cities and the roads and the by lanes
[Guest]: could be a whole lot better and we can play a role in making that happen.
[Amit Varma]: That's very enlightening.
[Amit Varma]: And I have a confession to make here.
[Amit Varma]: I consider myself the best driver in the history of Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason for that is no one changes lanes like I can, but I promise to reform
[Amit Varma]: after listening to you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show, Ravi, it's an honor.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Nice talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed the show and want to know more about Ravi's thoughts, you can find his
[Amit Varma]: paper on urban game changers at our podcast page on Pragati, the magazine I edit at thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow him on Twitter at Ravichandar, R-A-V-I-C-H-A-N-D-A-R.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and the Unseen, check out another great show by IVM
[Amit Varma]: Podcasts, Made in India, hosted by my friend May Thomas, where every week she profiles
[Amit Varma]: up and coming independent Indian bands.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting networks.
[Unknown]: Excuse me, Bhaiya.
[Unknown]: Excuse me.
[Unknown]: Yes, madam.
[Unknown]: What's on the menu?
[Unknown]: On the menu, we have Seen Unseen, Podcasts, On Course, Cyrus Says, Made in India, Rediscovery
[Unknown]: Project, Empowering Series, Sex Wax, IVM Likes, Simplified, Keeping It Queer, Things
[Unknown]: and Destinations, My Neighbor Zuckerberg, and The Fan Garage.
[Unknown]: What do you want?
[Unknown]: Can you repeat it once?
[Unknown]: We don't repeat.
[Unknown]: You can go to ivmpodcasts.com and listen to all this, or you can download their app.
[Unknown]: It's all up to you.